JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: the
state of U.S.-Russia
relations after yet more reports
of Trump
campaign advisers meeting with
Russian officials.
Then: a deadly war on drugs --
an inside look
at the Philippines' president
violent crackdown.
And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
are here to
analyze a full week of news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The head of the
Federal Reserve
is sending the strongest signal
yet that short-term
interest rates are going up
again this month.
Janet Yellen addressed a
business lunch in
Chicago today, and suggested
conditions seem
ripe for another rate hike.
JANET YELLEN, Federal Reserve
Chair: The committee
will evaluate whether employment
and inflation
are continuing to evolve in line
with our
expectations, in which case a
further adjustment
of the federal funds rate would
likely be
appropriate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Fed last
raised interest
rates in December, but officials
have indicated
there could be three hikes this
year.
A former journalist is now in
federal custody
for allegedly sending bomb
threats to at least
eight Jewish institutions.
Juan Thompson was arrested in
Saint Louis.
Authorities say he made the
threats, and then
blamed an ex-girlfriend.
Federal investigators cleared
evidence from
Thompson's home today.
He's also being questioned about
vandalism
at a Jewish cemetery outside
Saint Louis.
In all, more than 120 Jewish
sites nationwide
received threats in recent
weeks.
Vice President Pence today
defended using
a private e-mail account for
public business
while he was governor of
Indiana.
The Indianapolis Star reported
that some of
the e-mails dealt with security
matters.
Mr. Pence had sharply criticized
Hillary Clinton's
use of a private e-mail server
as secretary
of state.
Today, during a trip to
Janesville, Wisconsin,
he insisted what he did was
different.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
No, there's no comparison
whatever between
Hillary Clinton's practice of
having a private
server, mishandling classified
communication,
destroying e-mails when they
were requested
by the Congress and by
officials.
We have fully complied with all
Indiana's
laws.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A White House
spokeswoman said
Mr. Pence did everything --
quote -- "to the
letter of the law as governor."
In Yemen, U.S. warplanes staged
a second night
of airstrikes against al-Qaida
fighters.
They targeted sites in at least
two provinces.
The Pentagon denied reports that
ground troops
also took part.
In late January, a U.S. commando
raid in Yemen
left dozens of civilians and a
Navy SEAL dead.
Tunisia will take back 1,500
asylum seekers
rejected by Germany.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel
announced
the agreement in Tunis today.
It came after a Tunisian man
drove a truck
into a Berlin market last
December.
He killed a dozen people and
wounded scores
more.
Merkel's government took in some
900,000 migrants
and asylum seekers in 2015.
Back in this country, President
Trump touted
school choice as he toured a
Catholic school
in Orlando, Florida, today.
He met teachers and a class of
fourth grade
students, accompanied by
secretary of education,
Betsy DeVos.
The president praised parochial
schools that
educate disadvantaged children.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Education is the civil rights
issue of our
time.
And it's why I have asked
Congress to support
a school choice bill, and we
have come a long
way.
We're right out there and we're
ahead of schedule
in so many ways when it comes to
education.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
didn't say what
might be in the bill.
German automaker Daimler A.G.
today ordered
a recall of more than 300,000
Mercedes-Benz
vehicles in the U.S.
They may have a faulty fuse that
can spark
a fire.
The recall covers C-class,
E-class and CLA
Sedans, plus GLA and GLC sport
utility models
2015 through 2017.
And on Wall Street, stocks
finished this Friday
mostly flat.
The Dow Jones industrial average
edged up
just two points to close at
21005.
The Nasdaq rose nine, and the
S&P 500 added
just one point.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how allegations
over President Trump's ties to
Russia affect
relations between Moscow and
Washington; who
is carrying out the Philippines'
deadly war
on drugs; more than a dozen
states seek to
put limits on public protesters;
and much
more.
This week brought more reports
of repeated
contacts between Trump campaign
aides and
Russian officials.
Margaret Warner begins with the
latest details.
MARGARET WARNER: Attorney
General Jeff Sessions
returned to work today, after
recusing himself
from any investigation into
Moscow's election
meddling.
His recusal came after conceding
he'd met
twice with the Russian
ambassador during the
campaign.
Earlier, he told a Senate
committee he had
not.
But, today, Vice President Mike
Pence reaffirmed
his faith in Sessions.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
The president and I have full
confidence in
the attorney general.
He is a man of integrity.
MARGARET WARNER: Reports also
emerged that
campaign advisers J.D. Gordon
and Carter Page
met Ambassador Sergey Kislyak,
as did Jared
Kushner, President Trump's
son-in-law and
adviser.
That belied Page's own words to
the "NewsHour"
last month.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did you have any
meetings last
year with Russian officials in
Russia, outside
Russia, anywhere?
CARTER PAGE, Former Trump
Campaign Foreign
Policy Adviser: I had no
meetings.
No meetings.
MARGARET WARNER: In Moscow,
Russian Foreign
Minister Sergei Lavrov dismissed
the ongoing
furor.
SERGEI LAVROV, Russian Foreign
Minister (through
translator): I can only refer to
a quote that
was circulated today in the mass
media.
This strongly resembles a
witch-hunt or the
times of McCarthyism, which we
thought were
long over in the United States
as a civilized
country.
MARGARET WARNER: Mr. Trump also
called it
a witch-hunt.
And, today, he tweeted a photo
of Senate Minority
Leader Chuck Schumer meeting
with Russian
President Vladimir Putin in
2003.
Mr. Trump said: "We should start
an immediate
investigation into Senator
Schumer and his
ties to Russia and Putin.
A total hypocrite."
Schumer tweeted back that he'd
happily talk
about his contact with Putin,
asking, "Would
you and your team?"
Later, the president also
demanded a probe
of House Minority Leader Nancy
Pelosi for
having said she never met with
the Russian
ambassador.
Politico published a photo today
showing he
was part of a larger meeting
with Pelosi in
2010.
The political storm has
overshadowed any concrete
steps toward improving ties with
Russia, as
Mr. Trump has advocated.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
If we have a good relationship
with Russia,
believe me, that's a good thing.
MARGARET WARNER: Relations
turned icy at the
end of Obama administration,
over Russian
aggression in Ukraine, and its
military backing
for Damascus in the Syrian civil
war.
Since Mr. Trump took office,
diplomacy between
the two sides, at least
publicly, has been
limited.
The president spoke with Putin
by phone after
the inauguration.
And his secretary of state, Rex
Tillerson,
met with Lavrov at a G20 summit
in Germany.
Meanwhile, uncertainty over Mr.
Trump's intentions
toward Russia is rattling
American allies
in Europe.
Vice President Pence and Defense
Secretary
James Mattis tried last month to
reassure
NATO partners of Washington's
alliance solidarity.
One NATO partner, German
Chancellor Angela
Merkel, now plans to visit
Washington on March
14.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A broader look
now at the state
of U.S.-Russia relations and
what is at stake
for these two countries.
We get two views.
Andrew Weiss worked for both
Republican and
Democratic administrations as a
staffer on
the National Security Council in
the State
and Defense Departments.
He's now at the Carnegie
Endowment for International
Peace.
And Paul Saunders, he focused on
Russia at
the State Department during the
George W.
Bush administration.
He's now the executive director
of the Center
for the National Interest.
It's a foreign policy think
tank.
And we welcome both of you back
to the program.
Andrew Weiss, to you first.
What is the sense of the state
of U.S.-Russia
relations right now?
ANDREW WEISS, Carnegie Endowment
for International
Peace: The relationship between
the United
States and Russia is broken.
We are at a low point that goes
back to the
darkest days of the Cold War.
President Trump has been
promising that there's
going to be some kind of
dramatic resurgence.
He's talked about doing a grand
bargain with
Vladimir Putin, presumably
focused on the
war in Syria, the fight against
ISIS.
He hopes to contain China and
deal with more
a meddlesome Iran by somehow
breaking ground
with Russians.
I think that's setting
expectations way too
high.
The reasons for the relationship
being in
the doghouse are profound and
really go to
the heart of who we are as a
nation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Paul Saunders,
how do you see
the state of relations right
now?
PAUL SAUNDERS, Center for the
National Interest:
Well, I agree with Andrew that
the relationship
is really at its worst state
today since probably
the 1980s.
I think there is no question
about that.
Where I would differ with Andrew
is, I think
there are opportunities to
improve the relationship.
I do think there are some
possibilities in
Syria on some other issues, arms
control perhaps,
some other areas, too.
And, you know, the president
seems determined
to try that.
If he does, I think Moscow would
be receptive.
I think it's appropriate to keep
our expectations
in check.
But I do believe there are some
possibilities.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why do you say
they're broken,
Andrew Weiss?
ANDREW WEISS: Well, it comes
back to the sort
of core question of, how does
the U.S. formulate
its national security policy?
Our view is that there is a
liberal international
order out there.
It's been sort of the guiding
structure of
U.S. foreign policy since the
end of World
War II to build alliances,
institutions like
NATO alliance, support for the
E.U. and key
alliances in East Asia.
The Russians, on the other hand,
really want
to see that international order
chipped away
at.
They believe that that gives the
U.S. too
much authority in the world.
And they have seen that at home
the way to
build the legitimacy of the
Putin regime is
on the back of this idea that
there is an
external threat, and to use the
United States
as a boogeyman that will
mobilize the Russian
people in support of the
Kremlin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If that's the
case, Paul Saunders,
what gives you any belief that
the Russians
-- you listed Syria, you list
arms control
as two areas that you felt the
Russians would
be receptive to some sort of
overture from
President Trump.
What makes you believe that
that's the case?
PAUL SAUNDERS: Well, I think I
would disagree,
respectfully, with some of the
things that
Andrew said there.
First of all, I think Vladimir
Putin's legitimacy
in Russia rests primarily
actually on Russia's
economic success.
Now, the Russian economy
certainly has been
stalled for the last several
years.
There have been some further
slowdowns because
of the sanctions, but most
Russians are living
far better than at any time in
the history
of that country.
Secondly, as we think about the
international
system, the real threat to the
system is an alignment between
China and Russia.
Russia, on its own, its economy
is a 10th
of ours.
They're not going to destabilize
the international
system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So what about
that, Andrew
Weiss?
ANDREW WEISS: Well, I think what
we have seen
in the past couple of years is a
lot of opportunism
and risk-taking.
That has now become the sort of
bread and
butter of Russian foreign
policy.
So, you see spur-of-the-moment,
improvised
decisions to seize Crimea, to
launch a covert
war in Eastern Ukraine.
You then see this dramatic
military intervention
in Syria.
And then, most obviously,
recently, we have
seen this brazen interference in
our domestic
political life.
So this is a different, much
more sort of
nimble Russian foreign policy.
It's very destabilizing.
It's created a lot of
apprehension, particularly
among our European allies.
And the idea that the Russians
just want to
kind of go back to normal, I
think, is misplaced.
It is in their interest to see a
destabilized
U.S., to have our political
system chaotic
and sort of locked in an
internal division.
That to them is a success.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That is the
picture many Americans
are getting, Paul Saunders,
isn't it?
PAUL SAUNDERS: I think many
Americans are
getting that picture.
And, look, I mean, there are
serious problems
in Russia's conduct, and there
are serious
reasons for Americans to be
concerned.
I think there are ways to deal
with that.
The president has talked about
dealing with
Russia from a position of
strength.
I think, if we take that
approach, we can
deal with many of these
concerns.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What's at risk
here?
What's at stake, Andrew Weiss,
if this relationship
is in the condition that you
describe?
What stands to happen?
ANDREW WEISS: The worst thing,
which I can
see readily happening -- we had
an incident
about two days ago in Syria --
is some form
of unintentional either accident
or direct
conflict between our military
forces.
So, just a couple...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Between Russian
and U.S. forces?
ANDREW WEISS: Exactly.
The risk of that happening is
uncomfortably
high.
The Russians in Syria are
operating increasingly
close to our forces.
We had an incident a couple days
where they
were bombing Syrian opposition
forces supported
by the United States, and our
special operators
were just four or five
kilometers away.
In the air over Syria, we have
had a lot of
near misses.
You see brazen Russian efforts
in the airspace
over Europe to basically try to
get as obnoxious
and be in our face, and the idea
is, we will
put back, that we will be
intimidated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Paul Saunders,
why isn't that
a worry?
PAUL SAUNDERS: I think it's a
very considerable
worry.
I view that as a reason to try
to engage with
Moscow.
I think there are a lot of other
reasons to
try to engage.
If this relationship slips from
adversarial
to truly hostile, and we start
to see Russia
providing advanced weapons to
China, providing
more advanced weapons to Iran,
there are a
lot of other things that could
happen that
could be much worse for the
United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Speaking of
which, in less
than a minute, nuclear weapons?
These are the two countries with
the largest
nuclear arsenal in the world.
Andrew Weiss, what about that?
ANDREW WEISS: That part of the
agenda between
the United States and Russia is
deadlocked.
So, we're unlikely -- regardless
of what Donald
Trump's policies are on defense
spending,
on changes to our nuclear
arsenal, the reality
is, we have fundamental
disagreements with
the Russians.
They have violated a key arms
control treaty,
the INF Treaty, which Russia has
now fielded
new cruise missiles that violate
that treaty.
And they're very concerned about
U.S. programs,
our missile defenses in Europe,
and these
new conventional strategic
systems which they
believe will threaten their
strategic deterrent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
Paul Saunders,
how do you see the risks there?
PAUL SAUNDERS: Well, I think the
risks are
considerable.
At the same time, our economy is
10 times
the size of the Russian economy.
They can't afford -- they can
afford even
less than the Soviet Union to
get into a nuclear
arms race with the United
States.
I think we hold the cards.
I think it's an opportunity,
again, from a
position of strength, to try to
pursue that
agenda address the concerns we
have about
Russian conduct and try to lock
in some stability
in the relationship.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Paul Saunders,
Andrew Weiss,
deadly serious subject.
Thank you both very much.
PAUL SAUNDERS: Thank you.
ANDREW WEISS: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's fair to say
a reign of
terror grips the Philippines, as
its president,
Rodrigo Duterte, wages a brutal
war on drug
dealers and users.
According to Human Rights Watch,
more than
7,000 people have been killed in
just the
last nine months.
But who exactly is doing the
killing?
This story was reported by Kara
Magsanoc-Alikpala
and narrated by William
Brangham.
And a warning: There are some
disturbing images.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For decades,
slums here
in the Philippines have been
safe havens for
the illegal drug trade.
Crystal meth is sold in these
alleys just
like candy.
A gram costs at least $25.
That's triple the daily minimum
wage.
And it's the cheapest drug on
the market.
In this drug den, users rent
space to smoke
without fear of being caught.
It does a brisk business.
The government estimates that
meth can be
found in nearly every community
in the capital,
Manila, and, nationwide, there's
an estimated
1.3 million drug users.
Even kids get in on the trade,
making homemade
foil pipes to sell.
This is the crisis that
Philippine President
Rodrigo Duterte has vowed to
end.
One of his many outlandish
solutions?
Encouraging addicts to commit
suicide.
RODRIGO DUTERTE, Philippine
President (through
translator): Feel free to call
us, the police,
or do it yourself if you have
the gun.
You have my support.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Soon after the
new president
took office, a wave of summary
killings swept
across the country.
Suspected users and dealers were
shot dead
on the streets by unknown hit
men.
An estimated 40 people die
everyday.
Political analyst Ramon Casiple
believes the
violence is part of the
president's strategy
to sow fear.
RAMON CASIPLE, Political
Analyst: If what
they're saying is that he's
developing the
environment for these killings,
then I think
I would say yes, precisely,
that's the effect
he wants, to sow fear among the
criminals.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, are these
killings changing
anything in the Philippines, or
simply a sign
of nationwide lawlessness?
We found answers from a
supporter of the president.
She goes by the name Zenny, and
she wants
to hide her identity.
Zenny says Duterte's war on
drugs had a positive
outcome in her neighborhood.
Many users and dealers have
turned themselves
in, she says.
ZENNY, Philippines (through
translator): Our
neighborhood became more orderly
and peaceful
because of his war on drugs.
I voted for him because I want
the drug crisis
solved.
It really worked.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: She says her
own son was
so scared that he stopped doing
drugs, which
made her happy.
But this mother's peace didn't
last long.
A group of half-a-dozen gunmen
shot her 34-year-old
son dead.
ZENNY (through translator): Six
civilian men
barged themselves into our home.
They were carrying guns.
They told me to leave, so I
dashed out.
They were surrounding our place.
The media was there, the crime
investigators,
including a staff from the
funeral parlor.
I heard two gunshots.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: According to
police and
media reports, her son resisted
arrest, and
pulled a gun on his attackers.
But Zenny doesn't believe it.
ZENNY (through translator): How
can my son
own a gun, for Christ's sake?
He doesn't even have a penny to
buy himself
a cigarette, much more a gun.
How was it possible for him to
resist arrest
when they had him cornered?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: She thinks
it's a cover-up
by the police.
ZENNY (through translator):
Everything was
ready.
There were plenty of police, of
men in uniform.
It looks like they have a
systematic procedure
in place.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Currently,
Philippine police
say roughly 64 percent of these
deaths are
vigilante-style killings.
But the government says they're
not responsible.
They say only proper
investigations can determine
the real reasons.
Duterte's spokesman says the
government wants
these cases solved quickly.
ERNESTO ABELLA, Presidential
Spokesman (through
translator): I don't have the
timeline, but
he wants things to be done
quickly and appropriately.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But nine
months into Duterte's
drug war, there hasn't been a
single arrest
for any of these murders.
This inaction is deeply
frustrating to the
Philippine's own Commission on
Human Rights.
GWEN GANA, Commission on Human
Rights: The
investigation must be done
promptly.
And not only the investigation,
but it must
be shown that there is resolve
in really coming
out with a solution, or the
findings are really
clear and that it must be made
public right
away.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So who is
committing these
murders?
And who's ordering them?
Correspondent Kara
Magsanoc-Alikpala talked
with a self-described hit man.
He uses an alias, Kevin.
He says he belongs to a network
of assassins
who are protected by a political
figure.
He also says he's killed 15
people in the
last six months.
Kara asked him who these killers
were and
why they were doing it?
KEVIN, Philippines (through
translator): They're
a lot, but most of them are
cops, because
there is money involved.
They are paid about 310 U.S.
dollars per person
killed.
In one night, you need to kill
at least four,
at least one drug lord and one
pusher per
night.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This means a
night of killings
can earn these men more than the
average Filipino
earns in a month.
Kara asked, so where's the money
coming from?
KEVIN (through translator): From
our government,
from Duterte's office, from the
municipal
government, from the mayors.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
president's spokesman
rejects these accusations and
says Duterte
didn't order these executions.
He says these killings are
likely just fellow
drug gangs targeting each other.
ERNESTO ABELLA: References have
been made
that the deaths could be
attributed to internecine
killings, meaning to say people
among their
own peers doing that.
Personally, the president has
said that he
doesn't condone this sort of
killing.
RODRIGO DUTERTE: There will be
no letup in
this campaign.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But critics
have reason
to doubt the president.
President Duterte has been
linked to a secret
death squad back in his
hometown, Davao City.
In the late '90s, then Mayor
Duterte launched
an anti-drug campaign.
And, just like today, a number
of alleged
drug dealers and addicts were
murdered.
These killings were blamed on a
vigilante
group called the Davao Death
Squad.
And many said that Mayor Duterte
was behind
them.
MAN: If you're a drug pusher, if
you're a
drug lord here, do not come for
(INAUDIBLE)
I will not give you any.
Who killed them?
I don't know.
You're asking me?
I'm not the one.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But political
analyst Ramon
Casiple says Duterte's seeming
inaction serves
his goals.
RAMON CASIPLE: His own
assessment of the situation
was that he thinks there is a
sense to the
vigilantism, in the sense that
this protects
the community, this protects his
people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Father Amado
Picardal, who
lived in Davao, believes the
president was
behind the formation of the
Davao Death Squad.
The Philippines is a majority
Catholic country,
and the church is considered a
supporter of
the president, so Father
Picardal's accusations
are not made easily.
Picardal says former members of
the Death
Squad told him and his fellow
priests that
Duterte was directly involved.
FATHER AMADO PICARDAL,
Philippines: I believe
what is happening now is a
replication and
multiplication of the Davao
experience.
Davao is the template.
KARA MAGSANOC-ALIKPALA,
Journalist: I have
been around this area and seen a
lot of wakes
from extrajudicial killings
almost every day.
You also must get confessions
here from policemen
or just vigilantes.
FATHER AMADO PICARDAL: You know,
I heard from
my fellow priests that a number
of policemen
coming for confession has
increased.
And many of them are really
bothered by their
conscience.
So, what I would advise to
policemen who would
come for confession is, don't
follow illegal
orders.
Follow your conscience.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In 2009, Human
Rights Watch
and the Philippines' human
rights agency traced
1,000 deaths tied to the Davao
Death Squad.
They attempted to pursue a case
against then
Mayor Duterte for, at the least,
tolerating
these killings.
But no one was willing to take
the witness
stand and no case was filed.
Now, throughout the Philippines,
the body
count continues to grow, as
murderers remain
on the loose.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields
and David Brooks analyze the
latest political
news; and new revelations
surrounding the
death of Emmett Till, a
14-year-old killed
during the civil rights
movement.
But first: It's a battle playing
out around
the country that you may not
know about.
Lawmakers are targeting
protesters' tactics
in many state capitals, setting
up debates
over free speech vs. public
safety.
John Yang has the story.
JOHN YANG: Clashes over a North
Dakota oil
pipeline, demonstrations after a
Minnesota
police shooting, the women's
march in Washington
on inauguration weekend.
Mass protests are playing out on
a scale not
seen since the 1960s and '70s.
Some have turned violent.
Now, in state capitals across
the country,
Republican lawmakers are trying
to rein in
protests.
They say it's a matter of public
safety and
limiting economic damage.
Protesters and civil liberties
advocates say
it's an attack on free speech.
In Minnesota, pending
legislation would increase
fines for blocking highways and
airports.
BILL INGEBRIGTSEN (R), Minnesota
State Senator:
Not any of us, the 67 senators
at least that
I work with here in the
Minnesota Senate,
want to squelch any First
Amendment rights
at all.
But it goes over the top when
public safety,
the potential of public safety
is interfered
with.
JOHN THOMPSON, Community
Activist: Do you
honestly think that you are
penalizing people?
It's already against the law.
You honestly think that you
raising the fine
-- there's already a fine.
That's not going to stop us.
JOHN YANG: Last week, North
Dakota's governor
signed four bills aimed at
making it easier
to control protests like those
over the Dakota
Access pipeline.
Legislation is pending in 17
other states.
Among their provisions?
Increasing penalties, including
in some cases
prison time, for blocking
roadways, increasing
penalties for rioting, allowing
authorities
to seize the assets of anyone
involved in
a violent protest, and relieving
drivers of
liability if they accidentally
hit protesters
blocking a street.
For a deeper look at this, we're
joined by
Christopher Ingraham of The
Washington Post.
He's been tracking these
legislative efforts
across the country, and he joins
us from Fargo,
North Dakota.
Christopher, thanks for being
with us.
Christopher, we heard some of
the provisions
of some of this pending
legislation in the
piece, but how much farther?
Where will this take us if some
of these bills
are enacted into law?
How much farther will this take
us than where
we are now?
CHRISTOPHER INGRAHAM, The
Washington Post:
Well, that's the question.
And I think that's what a lot of
civil liberties
advocates are worried about.
They frame this essentially as
an assault
on free speech.
And one of the things they're
worried about,
the interesting thing about
these bills is
that they have been completely
100 percent
across the board introduced by
Republican
lawmakers only.
So, one of the concerns is that
if these laws
get enacted, they can be used as
cudgels by
whoever is in power at a given
time.
So, for instance, you look at
some of these
bills, including the one that
was signed in
North Dakota, they would do
things like make
it illegal to wear masks or
costumes a protest.
Now, that could apply to a guy
wearing, say,
a Guy Fawkes mask at the North
Dakota Access
pipeline protest.
It could also apply to, say, a
guy wearing
a George Washington mask at a
Tea Party process.
So when you have these things,
they could
potentially be really broadly
applied.
And I think that's what a lot of
observers
are really worried about here.
JOHN YANG: What is driving this
legislation?
When you see a lot of bills
introduced in
state legislatures across the
country like
this, sometimes, there's a group
behind it
are pushing it.
Is there anything like that in
this case?
CHRISTOPHER INGRAHAM: We're not
really seeing
that.
You're not really seeing
evidence of a group
like, say, ALEC, groups who
drafts model legislation.
There is some evidence that in
some of the
Western states, you see energy
and oil companies
lobbying legislatures to pass
these bills,
because, say, you know, they're
worried about
the coming Keystone Access
pipeline.
They don't want another North
Dakota pipeline
situation unfolding.
So, there is some interest from
energy groups
to do this.
But in a lot of cases, it's just
legislators,
it seems, taking initiative to
do it themselves
in response to protests they
see, like protests
for Donald Trump, protests for
black men who
have been shot by police
officers.
There's really just a lot of
different things
all kind of converging on this.
JOHN YANG: I know in your
reporting, you have
talked to civil liberties
advocates.
How do they think these laws
would stand up
to court challenges?
CHRISTOPHER INGRAHAM: That's
really an interesting
question.
One thing that multiple people
-- and these
are people in the university, as
well as people
as the ACLU.
One thing that they have said is
that the
Supreme Court and the federal
courts have
been really clear in the past 10
years or
so, specifically calling out
public places
like streets as places that are
protected,
where protest is protected.
They have some real doubts about
whether or
not these would pass
constitutional muster.
One thing they say is that,
look, you look
all across the country, there is
basically
not a single jurisdiction that
doesn't already
have some sort of law on the
books making
it a crime to obstruct traffic.
I think where they might get
into trouble
legally -- and we will have to
see how this
plays out -- is where you try to
make it a
crime to specifically protest in
a public
street.
I think that might be a dividing
line that
some of the courts might be
interested in
exploring.
JOHN YANG: How much public
support are there
for bills like these?
What is the public sentiment,
from what you
can tell?
CHRISTOPHER INGRAHAM: It's all
over the place.
I haven't found any good polling
on this.
I look at the responses to the
article that
I wrote, and they're really
cleaved down partisan
lines.
You have half the folks saying,
I was driving
home the other night and I was
stopped by
a protest on the highway and it
took me six
hours to get home, and it was a
huge headache,
and I think we really need this
legislation.
And then I hear from people who
say, look,
I have been to some of these
protests.
I'm infuriated that lawmakers
are trying to
crack down on this, and this
only strengthens
my resolve.
It makes me more likely to go
out there and
protest some more.
And I think, on that measure,
you can kind
of look at these bills as kind
of an indicator
of the success that these
protesters have
had at bringing these issues up
to a national
level, to the extent that
lawmakers feel they
have to respond to them.
JOHN YANG: Christopher Ingraham
of The Washington
Post, thanks for joining us.
CHRISTOPHER INGRAHAM: Thanks for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: From a joint
address to Congress
to the recusal of the attorney
general, it's
been a big week.
To help make sense of it all,
the analysis
of Shields And brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks.
So, I thought we were going to
be talking
tonight, first of all, about the
president's
address.
But, David, Russia, Russia,
Russia, it just
doesn't go away.
We now have the attorney general
of the United
States having to recuse himself
from any investigation
into what happened with the
Trump campaign.
What do you make of all this?
DAVID BROOKS: This is like
Napoleon and the
Russian winter.
It's just coming in droves for
the past few
months, just Russian issues.
Now, I would draw a distinction
between Sessions
and a lot of the other stuff.
So far, we don't know if
Sessions had any
substantive contacts on the
campaign stuff
or anything that might be really
incriminating.
And it's worth remembering he
was asked specifically
did he talk to Russians about
campaign stuff.
And so there are a lot of
pointless meetings
in Washington.
And he could have just had
pointless meeting
to see the ambassador.
If he had something nefarious,
would they
really have done it in the
Senate office?
So, I'm not sure the Sessions
stuff will rise
to scandal level.
I think he was right to recuse
himself.
On the other hand, on the
general Trump world,
there is contact after contact
with the Russians,
and some of them which are
fishy.
And the two questions that I'm
wondering about
-- and I'm not sure we will ever
know the
answer -- the first is the
obvious one.
Did they have contact with
Russians on their
campaign meddling?
But the second and the more
troubling one
is, who's been investing in
Donald Trump's
companies for all these years?
Does he owe somebody something?
Should we know about that?
And why didn't he release his
taxes?
Is Russia at the heart of that
as well?
And so until we get to an answer
of -- and
this is why taxes get released,
so you can
know if somebody is really in
debt to some
other foreign power.
And we don't know the answer to
that because
of his secrecy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Mark, those
are questions
that we're unlikely to get the
answers to
any time soon.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, under the
status quo,
I think that is true.
And I think the questions David
asks are salient
and important.
As far as Senator Sessions is
concerned, Judy,
it follows the pattern that
these come out
after there's a press report.
It happened with General Flynn.
And unlike General Flynn, where
there really
is strong, more than suspicion,
that he discussed
policy and actions with the
Russian ambassador,
I don't think anybody who knows
Jeff Sessions
thinks that's the case.
But there is one question that
just demands
an answer.
And that is, he testifies before
Al Franken.
Yes, it's a rambling question.
But then Pat Leahy, the senior
senator, pro
tem of the Senate, writes it out
in longhand,
any contacts from campaign
post-election?
Now, you leave that hearing, you
give that
answer, you go back to your
office, staff
people are with you, your
scheduler is with
you, your press person is with
you.
Why not just come out and say,
hey, look,
this was -- I did have these
meetings with
the ambassador?
And the question, why?
Why does it have to come out
this way?
And it does.
It does fit a pattern.
There's no two ways about it.
And I think it's a disturbing
pattern.
It's a distressing pattern.
And whether it's Roger Stone or
Carter Page
or -- I mean, these are not
attractive, appealing
people, whether it's Paul
Manafort and his
Russian contacts.
It's not a question simply of
dealing with
Russia.
It's a question that we have now
17 intelligence
agencies in the United States of
America unanimously
agreeing that Russia meddled in
this -- and
tried to discredit our
democratic process.
So, I mean, you know, that's
whom they were
dealing with.
It wasn't a question of just
making a quick
buck.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, David, all
sorts of questions
come out of this.
Is it enough for the attorney
general to recuse
himself?
Do we need to think about
something bigger?
There is a lot of conversation
now about whether
there should be an outside,
independent investigation.
I mean, what needs to happen
right now?
DAVID BROOKS: I think the
recusal is right.
The calls for resignation strike
me as completely
over the top.
I think we need to know, why
Russia?
There are 200-odd countries in
the world.
Why has so much of this
administration focused
on Russia?
Now, is it because Donald Trump
is very sensitive
to the charge that he was handed
the election
by Russia and he is sort of
Russia-focused?
But the Russian obsession
predates that, which
is why I think, after he
declared bankruptcy,
a lot of Americans actually
wanted to invest
in Donald Trump.
So who was doing all the
investing?
He has got all these luxury
properties around
the world.
Who was buying?
And, so to me, it's, why the
Russia focus?
Is it some ideological thing he
has for Russia?
Is it some man crush on Vladimir
Putin?
I don't know.
But, somehow, that's the part
that needs to
be investigated.
I don't -- I'm not -- I'm
generally not for
special prosecutors and things,
because they
tend to run out of control.
But getting to the core of that
issue, I don't
know how you do it, but that is
how you -- I
think we need to do it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, that's the
only way you
could get to some of this.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I think,
Judy, first of
all, I think David raises the
questions that
do demand an answer, and how are
we going
to get that answer?
The recusal, he had no choice
but to recuse
himself.
The red Republican wall was
breaking.
When Kevin McCarthy, the
Republican House
leader, calls for his recusal,
when Jason
Chaffetz, one of the last
defenders of Donald
Trump, having said, after the
"Hollywood Access"
tape that he couldn't face his
14-year-old
daughter and then still support
Donald Trump,
then two weeks later endorsed
again Donald
Trump for president, he said he
had to recuse
-- Jeff Sessions had to.
And so did Rob Portman, the
senator from Ohio.
So, I think this was what he had
to do.
And the problem with the House
Intelligence
Committee and the Senate
Intelligence Committee
is that the White House felt
comfortable enough
to call them and ask them to be
their character
witness with the press, Richard
Burr, the
senator from North Carolina, and
Devin Nunes,
the congressman from California.
So, the question is, the only
time you move
to an independent, if you had an
ideal Baker-Hamilton,
9/11-type group, is, quite
honestly, when
there is a lack of faith and a
lack of faith
and confidence in the existing
process.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, this is why
institutions
matter so much.
In Watergate, you had -- sure,
it was partisan,
but you still could go to a
congressional
hearing and there would be some
sense there
would a Howard Baker, who would
be an honest
broker, or Hamilton, Lee
Hamilton.
MARK SHIELDS: That's exactly
right.
DAVID BROOKS: Or you had people
like that.
And maybe there are people like
that floating
around in Washington who you
could appoint,
like a 9/11 Commission.
But the official institutions of
Congress,
not a lot of credibility there
right now,
and not a lot of expectation
they would act
in any way, other than as
partisan bodies.
And so this is what we see when
we get the
breakdown of institutions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, meanwhile...
MARK SHIELDS: Angus King --
Angus King from
Maine and John McCain from
Arizona.
JUDY WOODRUFF: An independent
and a Republican.
MARK SHIELDS: An independent.
Both established independents
and respected,
you're going to go that
direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But I was just
going to say,
the way the president is
responding today
is by tweeting pictures of Nancy
Pelosi and
Chuck Schumer meeting with the
Russian ambassador
a few years ago.
Let's talk about the speech
Tuesday night.
It feels longer ago than that,
Mark.
Do we know now more about what
Donald Trump's,
President Trump's priorities are
after that
speech?
MARK SHIELDS: Not really.
I mean, we have absolutely -- we
know general
objectives, but we have no idea
how we're
going to get from here to there.
And he got an enormous amount of
praise, and
which basically lasted until the
stories about
Russia and Attorney General
Sessions came
out.
But there is a low bar, Judy.
This is somebody who has called
other politicians,
other Republicans, dopey,
hypocrite, stupid,
lying, weak, loser, choker.
I mean, and so he comes in, and
he doesn't
do this, and, all of a sudden,
my goodness
gracious, you know, it is.
It's the Gettysburg Address.
It's the -- FDR's Four Freedom
speech.
What he did was, he was
controlled for an
hour.
There was no invective.
There was no vitriol, or very
little.
But, as far as specifics, we
know health care
is going to be bigger, and
better, and cheaper,
and more access.
And now you can't even get ahold
of the plan.
It's like the Manhattan Project
at Los Alamos.
They keep it in a locked room.
Maybe David has seen it, but I
don't know
anybody else who has.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: It's in my dry
cleaner.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: OK.
DAVID BROOKS: I thought the
speech was Shakespearian,
Lincolnesque.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: I would say I
think we do have
a -- I got a better sense of him
-- or I got
a lesser sense of him, because,
usually, it's
all about him.
And it's about the clown
behavior or the things
Mark is talking about.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: But, here, you
have got a little
idea of the project.
And, frankly, I got a little
sense of why
the guy got elected, because we
were all having
debates about big government vs.
small government,
our normal debates.
And Republicans were standing
for certain
sort of things, eliminate the
national debt,
be global policemen, restore the
right to
life.
He ignores all that.
He's just not doing any of that
stuff.
He's saying, you, Americans, you
feel endangered,
and I'm going to protect you.
And so the line I had was that
he's privatized
compassion and nationalized
intimidation.
And what I meant by that --
probably too proud
of that line.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: What I meant by
that...
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're allowed to
repeat your
good lines on the program any
time.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: What I meant, that
all the compassionate
parts of government, giving
people a hand
up or a safety net, he wants to
cut all that.
And that's just not part of the
emotional
repertoire.
But being tough on our enemies,
whether foreign
or domestic, that, he's doing in
magnitudes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if that is
what he is doing,
if we know a little more,
Mark...
MARK SHIELDS: Privatize profit
and socialize
loss.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: That was the
Republican economic
mandate for a long time.
DAVID BROOKS: Updating it.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, is he in any
better shape,
Mark, in terms of getting his
programs through?
I realize we don't know a lot of
detail right
now.
But is...
MARK SHIELDS: Well, they have
made a calculation,
a political calculation.
It's hard to argue with it.
It's a Republican Congress.
He's playing very much to his
base.
He's not expanding his base.
He's not reaching across the
divide, except
by not insulting.
But he is catering to and
holding and speaking
to and speaking for his base,
those who supported
him.
So, he's 85 or 87 to nine among
Republicans.
As long as he's there, OK, as
long as his
numbers are that high,
Republicans are going
to fall in line.
They're going to support him, or
they're going
to at least think two or three
times before
breaking with him.
But, Judy, there is no sense of
how he's going
to pay for any of this.
And there's no sense of the
specifics.
We have no more specific idea on
what he wants
to do on tax cuts and tax reform
than we had
before the speech.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
If they can find the health care
plan under
the magic sofa cushion in the
Capitol, wherever
it's hiding, they're going to
find a lot of
opposition on the right.
And this is actually going to be
a trope of
the Trump administration.
If they ever actually come up
with an agenda,
there is going to be a lot of
people on his
right who are Republicans who
are going to
be very unhappy with the levels
of spending
or even the levels of tax cuts
-- or tax credits
in the health care plan.
So, I think, on substantive
matters on a lot
of these issues, they're going
to have a big
issue, big problem.
And, secondly, a lot of these
programs, like
the health care, it shifts risk
down to the
individuals.
MARK SHIELDS: It does.
DAVID BROOKS: And I happen to
think it could
create good markets and reduce
costs.
But you're definitely shifting
risk.
And a lot of Americans are like,
I have got
enough risk in life.
No thank you.
And I think that is going to
come back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we're eight
going to
be looking at the sofa on the
Hill or at David's
dry cleaner.
MARK SHIELDS: David's dry
cleaner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks,
Mark Shields,
thank you both.
Now: unexpected revelations more
than 60 years
after one of the more seminal
moments in the
civil rights era.
That's the focus of Timothy
Tyson's new book,
"The Blood of Emmett Till," the
latest addition
to the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
Jeffrey Brown spoke with him
recently.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why retell this
story?
What drove you to want to take
another look?
TIMOTHY TYSON, Author, "The
Blood of Emmett
Till": I was actually working on
another book,
and a nice woman from Raleigh
called on the
phone and wanted to tell me how
much she liked
my previous book.
She said, well, my mother-in-law
is coming
next week.
She's -- I gave her the book for
Christmas,
and she liked it very much, and
we'd like
to have a cup of coffee with
you.
She said, well, you might know
my mother-in-law.
Her name was Carolyn Bryant.
And, of course, being a
historian of the 20th
century civil rights movement, I
knew that
Carolyn Bryant had not uttered a
word in public
about the lynching of Emmett
Till since 1955.
JEFFREY BROWN: The woman at the
store who
made the claims about Emmett
Till.
TIMOTHY TYSON: In whose name he
was lynched.
JEFFREY BROWN: Remind us what
she had said,
and what she says now.
TIMOTHY TYSON: In court, she
testified to
something that was tantamount to
sexual assault,
to coming around the counter,
grabbing her
by the waist with his hands, and
not letting
go, and speaking to her
sexually.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have broken
some new ground
here with having her say that
the most sensational
parts of her testimony were not
true.
TIMOTHY TYSON: Yes.
In reference to the sort of
physical piece,
she said, that part's not true.
Nothing that boy did could ever
justify what
happened to him.
JEFFREY BROWN: You know, I read
that in your
book, when she says that, and,
in one way,
it's the most obvious statement
possible,
right?
Of course nothing that he did
could justify
what happened to him.
But what importance do you feel,
if any, of
her finally saying it?
TIMOTHY TYSON: I'm sure it's
important to
the Till family and to other
people who have
-- you know, have a kind of
connection to
the case.
But, you know, I certainly never
thought she
was telling the truth at trial.
People are really interested
because it's
a mystery.
She's been in hiding almost for
all these
60-some years.
It was her husband who did the
killing and
her brother-in-law.
It's not clear what role she had
in that.
But the FBI investigated this in
2005 and
said there was nothing to
prosecute her on.
And a grand jury that had a
black majority
ruled not to indict her.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do you know why
she finally
spoke?
TIMOTHY TYSON: I can't say for a
fact.
I can't read her mind.
And she didn't say.
There was kind of an implication
that she
was in poor health and getting
on in years
and wanted to have her say and
tell what she
knew.
JEFFREY BROWN: The real heroine
of that -- of
the whole episode is Emmett
Till's mother,
Mamie.
TIMOTHY TYSON: Yes, so
courageous.
She brings Emmett's body back
from Mississippi
and has an open casket funeral,
so everybody
can see what the world did to my
boy, she
said.
She also gets on the phone even
before the
body comes back and starts
calling reporters,
and just becomes a clearinghouse
for this
media operation.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's fascinating,
because she
took her personal grief and made
it into a
kind of public awareness.
TIMOTHY TYSON: That's right.
Yes.
That's right.
And she knows Chicago.
And she leverages the strength
of black Chicago,
of the institutions that had
been built there
over the decades, The Chicago
Defender, Johnson
Publishing, which is "Ebony" and
"Jet," black
labor unions, and so on.
With that, a movement emerges
that becomes
the infrastructure for the
national civil
rights movement.
One of the grassroots activists
in Mississippi
spoke at Dexter Street Baptist
Church, invited
there by an unknown pastor named
Martin Luther
King.
And Rosa Parks was in the
congregation.
And four days later, she was
asked to move
to the back of the bus.
She later says, "I thought about
Emmett Till,
and I could not move."
JEFFREY BROWN: And the name
Emmett Till cited
to this day.
TIMOTHY TYSON: He's emblematic
of racial injustice
in America, and of violence
against young
black men in particular, and the
ruthless
indifference to the lives of
young black men.
So, yes, this is a story that
won't let us
go.
JEFFREY BROWN: What compels you?
What pushes you personally to
look at this
history?
TIMOTHY TYSON: The summer that I
turned 11,
a boy that I played with every
day, his father
and his brothers murdered this
young black
man in public for speaking
perhaps something
flirtatious to a white woman at
the store
counter.
And they chased him out of the
store and shot
him from behind and then beat
his head in
with stocks of the rifles.
And this wasn't a murder
mystery.
And they were acquitted really
in protest
against school integration.
It was almost an atmosphere of
war.
And I wondered, how did this all
get started?
Why am I in this craziness?
And that began a process of
discovery that
led me, you know, a long way.
JEFFREY BROWN: The book is "The
Blood of Emmett
Till."
Timothy Tyson, thank you very
much.
TIMOTHY TYSON: Well, thank you,
Jeffrey.
Thanks for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, as the
world's Christians
begin Lent, a six-week period of
introspection
in preparation for Easter,
reflections from
Casper ter Kuile, a researcher
at Harvard
University, who shares his
humble opinion
on the soul survival happening
outside America's
churches.
CASPER TER KUILE, Harvard
University: I grew
up never going to church.
And as a 30-year-old married
man, I still
don't, not because I don't value
reflection,
community, even the experience
of the divine.
I do.
But traditional religious
congregations don't
appeal to me.
And I'm not alone.
Millennials are turning away
from religion
faster than any other age group.
And according to the Pew
Research Center,
more than a third of Americans
between 18
and 35 are now unaffiliated,
meaning, when
asked on a survey what religious
identity
they hold, they answer none of
the above.
But what's really interesting is
that the
overwhelming majority of us
nones aren't necessarily
atheists.
Two-thirds believe in God or a
universal spirit,
and one in five even pray every
day.
We aren't young people who hate
religion.
It's a growing group that feel
like they have
been left behind by religious
institutions.
In a move that confused a lot of
my friends
and family, I have found
countless examples
of other millennials creating
new forms of
community that often fulfill the
same functions
that a traditional religious
group would have.
And they come in all shapes and
sizes.
It might be a regular meal with
strangers
to share honestly one's
experience after losing
a loved one, like the
organization The Dinner
Party.
Within a few years, The Dinner
Party has spread
to 116 cities across the U.S.
hosted by volunteers
who create sacred spaces for
their guests.
It might be lifting weights and
climbing ropes
five mornings a week like at
CrossFit.
And if you have a friend
involved in a CrossFit,
you will know how evangelical
that community
is.
Or it might be experiencing
healing and forgiveness
through movement and meditation
at Afro Flow
Yoga.
Each of these communities and
others like
them shape participants' world
views, ethics
and behaviors.
And in a culture where many are
hungry for
connection, these communities
offer the experience
of being part of something
bigger than themselves,
what some theologians might
describe as experiencing
the divine.
Now, you may dismiss these
communities as
simple entertainment, but we're
convinced
that this is the new face of
religious life
in America.
Just as you would expect in a
religious congregation,
people in these communities
build friendships
and drive one another to the
hospital when
they need a ride.
They help each other raise money
to fight
cancer.
And some are even getting
involved in struggles
for more affordable housing.
While a few thousand churches
close every
year, many fewer open.
So, as you drive through your
town and notice
an empty house of worship, pay
attention next
time you see a community
workspace, a climbing
gym or a micro-brewery.
They may just be the new center
of soulful
community that you have been
looking for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: We preview a new
documentary on PBS'
"American Masters" about country
music star
Patsy Cline.
We visit her hometown and learn
about her
hardscrabble early days before
she found fame.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tune in later tonight on
"Washington Week":
the reporter who broke the story
that led
Attorney General Sessions to
recuse himself
from the investigation.
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
Saturday: As cities
become more densely populated, a
new film
looks at how that might spur
innovation.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and see you soon.